XMAP is an interactive planet and orbit mapping utility for use with the GBII
client. It provides mouse controls for surveying, moving civilans and troops,
buttons for performing analysis, survey, and report, and a simple graphing
function for fertility, resources, efficients, mobility, troop concentrations,
population concentrations, and maximum population.

This version of XMAP is based on the version 2.1.0 released by Scott Anderson
(sander@engin.umich.edu) as modified by Rich Fitzgerald
(fitz@rsj.harvard.edu). XMAP is provided on an as-is basis, free for charge, by
me. No warranty, express or implied, is provided. You are free to modify the
source in any manner; I do ask that you send additions to me before posting them
in the public domain.

This version of XMAP was developed on a Sun b/w/ SPARCstation SLC running SUnOS
4.1.1 and X11R4, and tested on an xterminal connected to a DECsystem 5000
running ULTRIX 4.2A (Rev. 47) and X11R5. I make no claims about it working on
other systems... :)

XMAP can be incorporated into the GBII client by answering appropriately when
running the client setup program. To install manuall, include the line:
#define XMAP
In the file gb.h, and make sure in the Makefile that the XLIBS line reads:
XLIBS = -lX11 -L/usr/lib/X11
(Use the appropriate location for your X libraries).

STARTING XMAP:
  XMAP starts automagically with gbII. A separate x window will be created for
displaying maps. To put a map in the window, just use the 'map' command like
normal. XMAP intercepts the map data and formats it in the XMAP window.
Similary, data from the 'orbit' command is also intercepted and displayed.

THE XMAP WINDOW:
  Left side:   Sector indicator.
               Mapping panel: XMAP toggle, remap, map.
               Info panel: analysis, survey, report.
               CD panel: CD .., CD /, CD Home, CD Here. (CD Here does not
               appear until after the first map/orbit request.)
  Top:         Input windo. Contains '> ^' prompt.
  Right side:  Graph panel: Graph toggle button and graph selection buttons.
               (These do not appear until you map your first planet.)
               Orbit panel: Display select, reverse orbit, zoom out. (These
               do not appear until you map your first orbit, and zoom out
               does not appear unless you've zoomed in.)
  Bottom:      Planet and current sector data.
  Middle:      Area where planet maps and orbits are shown.

THE INPUT WINDOW:
  The long rectangle at the top of the XMAP window is the input window. Any
  printable characters that you type whil the mouse point is within the XMAP
  window will appear here.
  You can use the backspace or delet keys to erase characters.
  The RETURN key will send whatever is in the input window to the client for
  processing like any command typed at the command line.
  The ESCAPE key will clear the input window.
  Clicking on any mouse button within the window will move the text insertion
  point to the current mouse position. (Still a bit crude.)
  Several actions and buttons use the input window for arguments, include
  civ/troop movements and the survey/analysis,report buttons.

XMAP TOGGLE, RE-MAP and MAP BUTTONS:
  The top left button allows you to set what maps are displayed in the XMAP
  window. The current setting is shown in the button; clicking on the button
  will cycle through the options. the possible settings are XMap On (planet maps
  and orbits), XMap Off (nothing - everything is sent to the terminal window),
  Maps Only, and Orbits Only. XMAP has problems displaying planets with width
  greater than 36 in its default window size. Turning off the display of planet
  maps will allow you to view maps of such planets in your terminal window. It
  also allows you to look at two maps at once.
  The RE-MAP button redraws the current plaent or orbit no matter what scope you
  are in. The MAP button maps the current scope.

SURVEY, ANALYSIS, REPORT BUTTONS:
  These buttons perform their respective actions upon the scope currently shown
  in the XMAP window. SURVEY performace a global survey, ANALYSIS does a sector
  analysis, and REPORT reports all ships.
  If you have typed something in the input window , the contents of the input
  window are sent as arguments to the SURVEY, ANALYSIS, and REPORT buttons. For
  example, typing '-16' and then pressing ANALYSIS button will perform 'analysis
  -16'. Typing 'sd=' and then pressing the REPORT button will perform 'report
  sd='.

CD BUTTONS:
  These buttons are pretty self-explanatory. CD .. moves you up one level in
  scope, CD / goes to the universal scope, CD Home goes to your default scope,
  and CD Here goes to the currently displayed scope.

PLANET MAPS:
  When mapping planets, XMAP displays several planet stats in the bottom panel:
  resources, fuel, destruct, population, max. population, and toxicity. (Note
  that several things are not currently displayed such as enslaved status,
  compatibility, and crystal stocks. these however, do still appear with the
  rest of the planet info in the terminal window.) When moving the mouse pointer
  around, the stats of the sector being pointed to are also shown in the bottom
  panel, as well as information on up to 10 ships landed in that sector. Sectors
  you own have a black background; those not owned by you have a white
  background (note that the 'toggle highlight' setting on the server is
  currently ignored).

SURVEYING:
  The left mouse button is the survey button. Point to a sector and click the
  left mouse button to get the survey data for that sector. If you want survey
  data for a range of sectors, click on one of the corner sectors of the desired
  range, *hold* the mouse button down, and drage the pointer to the opposite
  corner. A line box will follow the pointer, showing you which sectors are
  being highlighted. Release the mouse button to get the survey for that range.
  While performing a range survey, the Current Sector window in the upper left
  corner of the XMAP window will show the selected range.
  Surveying also allows you to update the XMAP information on the selected
  sectors. You may need to do this after executing commands that change the
  status of sectors, such as landing or launching ships or moving population
  around via commands instead of using XMAP (see below).

MOVING CIVS and TROOPS:
  The middle mouse button controls civilian movement and hte right button
  controls troop movement. Click and hold the proper mouse button on the sector
  you wisht to move the civs/troops *from*, drag the pointed to the destination
  sector, and release the button to move the civs/troops. Note that by dragging
  the pointer off the left or right side you can wrap horizontally, thereby
  moving civs/troops to the other side of the planet.
  If you have not typed anything in the input windo, the default is to move 2
  civ/troop. (You can modify the defaults by changing the appropriate values in
  xmap.h.) Otherwise, whatever is in the input window is taken as the number of
  civs/troops to move. Notice that you can only move one sector at a time; look
  for multiple moves in the future.

GRAPHING:
  XMAP can perform graphing of values for fertility, resources, efficiency,
  mobility, troop concentrations, population density, and maximum
  population. This is done by replacing the sector designations (usually a
  sector type, ship type, or race number) with a scale of 0 to 9 (0 low, 9 high)
  that represents the concentration in each sector of the current graph type.
  To enter graphing mode, click on the GRAPH button in the upper right corner of
  the window. nothing will happen unless a graph type is chosen by clicking one
  of the buttons below the GRAPH button. Once a graph type has been chosen, the
  sector map will be replaced by a map of the same size and format, but with a
  number 0 through 9 in each sector, representing the relative value of the
  chosen graph type.
  When not in graphing mode, XMAP displays for each sector troops if present, or
  ships if present, or geography if neither are present. You can view geography
  everywhere by selecting the GEOGRAPHY button while in graphing mode.
  Click on the GRAPH button once again will return to sector map mode.
  All other functions still work in graph mode, including curveys, moving
  civs/toops, etc.

XORBIT:
  When the first orbit is displayed, the orbit panel appears in the lower right
  corner. Note that the program has some problems identifying requested orbit
  scopes. Thus with command like 'orbit /star' or 'map ..' (at planet scope),
  the display MIGHT NOT be identified correctly, in which case buttons like CD
  Here and RE_MAP will NOT work properly.
  The orbit display button allows you to display everything, only ships, or only
  stars and planets. The current setting is displayed. clicking on it with any
  mouse button will cycle through to the next setting.
  Because some objects in the orbit display may be written on top of others, the
  REVERSE ORBIT button lets you reverse the order in which things are displayed.

ZOOMING:
  When an orbit map is displayed, you can zoom in on a particular area by moving
  the mouse pointer to one corner of the area you want and depressing any
  button. While holding the button down, drag the mouse pointer to the opposite
  corner (a box appears showing the area to be magnified) and release the
  button.
  You can also change the zoom by tying a number and clicking on the ZOOM
  button. The center of the field of view will not change but the zoom will
  increase by the factor you've entered.
  To return to full view, click with any mouse button on the ZOOM button.

FIXES, ADDITIONS:
  See the files xmap.h and CHANGES.XMAP.

KNOWN BUGS, OMISSIONS:
  Toggle highlight setting ignored for maps.
  Orbit scopes not always properly identified.
  See TODO.XMAP

Let me know if you have problems with XMAP on your system, and anything that you
would like to see added.

Rich Fitzgerald
fitz@rsj.harvard.edu