@ Human (or you)
- A wall
| A wall
+ A door
. The floor of a room
# A corridor
} Water filled area
< The staircase to the previous level
> The staircase to the next level
^ A trap
$ A pile, port or chest of gold
% A piece of food
! A potion
* A gem
? A scroll
= A ring
/ A wand
[ A suit of armor
) A weapon
( A useful item (camera, key, rope, etc.)
0 An iron ball
_ An iron chain
" An amulet
, A trapper
: A chameleon
~ A lurker above
& A demon
A A giant ant
B A giant bat
C A centaur;
  Of all the monsters put together by the Greek Imagination
  the Centaurs (Kentauroi) constitutes a class in themselves.
  Despite a strong streak of sensuality in their make-up,
  their normal behavior was moral, and they took a kindly
  though of man's welfare. The attempted outrage of Nessos on
  Deianeira, and that of the whole tribe of Centaurs on the
  Lapith women, are more than offset by the hospitality of
  Pholos and by the wisdom of Cheiron, physician, prophet,
  lyrist, and the instructor of Achilles. Further, the Cen-
  taurs were peculiar in that their nature, which united the
  body of a horse with the trunk and head of a man, involved
  an unthinkable duplication of vital organs and important
  members. So grotesque a combination seems almost un-Greek.
  These strange creatures were said to live in the caves and
  clefts of the mountains, myths associating them especially
  with the hills of Thessaly and the range of Erymanthos.
  [Mythology of all races, Vol. 1,  pp.270-271]
D A dragon
E A floating eye
F A freezing sphere
G A gnome
H A hobgoblin;
  Hobgoblin. Used by the Puritans and in later times for
  wicked goblin spirits, as in Bunyan's 'Hobgoblin nor foul
  friend', but it's more correct use is for the friendly spir-
  its of the brownie type. In 'A misummer night's dream' a
  fairy says to Shakespeare's Puck:
    Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,
    You do their work, and they shall have good luck:
    Are you not he?
  and obviously Puck would not wish to be called a hobgoblin
  if that was an ill-omened word.
  Hobgoblins are on the whole, good-humoured and ready to be
  helpful, but fond of practical joking, and like most of the
  fairies rather nasty people to annoy. Boggarts hover on the
  verge of hobgoblindom. Bogles are just over the edge.
  One Hob mentioned by Henderson, was Hob Headless who haunted
  the road between Hurworth and Neashem, but could not cross
  the little river Kent, which flowed into the Tess. He was
  exorcised and laid under a large stone by the roadside for
  ninety-nie years and a day. If anyone was so unwary as to
  sit on that stone, he would be unable to quit it for ever.
  The ninety-nine years is nearly up, so trouble may soon be
  heard of on the road between Hurworth and Neasham.
  [Kathrine Briggs, A dictionary of Fairies]
I An invisible stalker
J A jackel
K A kobold
L A leprechaun;
  The Irish Leprechaun is the Faeries' shoemaker and is known
  under various names in different parts of Ireland: Cluri-
  caune in cork, Lurican in Kerry, Lurikeen in Kildare and Lu-
  rigaduan in Tipperary. Although he works for the Faeries,
  the Leprechaun is not of the same species. He is small, has
  dark skin and wears strange clothes. His nature has some-
  things of the manic-depressive about it: first he is quite
  happy, whistling merrily as he nails a sole on to a shoe; a
  few minutes later, he is sullen and morose, drunk on his
  home-made heather ale. The Leprechaun's two great loves are
  tobacco and whiskey, and he is a first rate con-man, impos-
  sible to out-fox. No one, no matter how clever, has ever
  managed to sheat him out of his hidden pot of gold or his
  magic shilling. At the last minute he always thinks of some
  way to divert his captor's attention and vanishes in the
  twinkling of an eye.
  [From: A Field Guide to the Little People
   by Nancy Arrowsmith & George Moorse.]
M A mimic
N A nymph
O An Orc
P A purple worm
Q A quasit
R A rust monster
S A snake
T A troll
U An umber hulk
V A vampire
W A wraith
X A xorn
Y A yeti
Z A zombie
a An acid blob
b A giant beetle
c A cockatrice;
  Once in a great while, when the positions of the starts are
  just right, a seven-year-old rooster will lay an egg. Then,
  along will come a snake, to coil around the egg, or a toad,
  to squat upon the egg, keeping it warm and helping it to
  hatch. When it hatches, out comes a creature call basil-
  isk, or cockatrice, the most deadly of all creatures. A sin-
  gle glance from its yellow, piercing toad's eyes will kill
  both man and beast. Its power of destruction is said to be
  so great that sometimes simply to hear its hiss can prove
  fatal. Its breath is so venomenous that it causes all vege-
  tation to wither.
  There is, however, one creature which can withstand the
  basilisk's deadly gaze, and this is the weasel. No one knows
  why this is so, but although the fierce weasel can slay the
  basilisk, it will itself be killed in the struggle. Perhaps
  the weasel knws the basilisk's fatal weakness: if it ever
  sees its own reflection in a mirror it will perish instant-
  ly. But even a dead basilisk is dangerous, for it is said
  that merely touching its lifeless body can cause a person to
  sicken and die.
  [From: Mythical Beasts by Deirdre Headon (The Leprechuan
   Library) and other sources.]
d A dog
e An ettin
f A fog cloud
g A gelatinous cube
h A homunculus
i An imp;
  An 'imp' is an off-shoot or cutting. Thus an 'ymp tree' was
  a grafted tree, or one grown from a cutting, not from seed.
  'Imp' properly means a small devil, an off-shoot of Satan,
  but the distinction between goblins or bogles and imps from
  hell is hard to make, and many in the Celtic countries as
  well as the English Puritans regarded all fairies as devils.
  The fairies of tradition often hover uneasily between the
  ghostly and diabolic state.
  [Katherine Briggs, A dictionary of Fairies]
j A jaguar
k A killer bee
l A Leocrotta
m A minotaur
n A nurse
o An owlbear
p A piercer
q A quivering blob
r A giant rat
s A scorpion
t A tengu;
  The tengu was the most troublesome creature of Japanese
  legend. Part bird and part man, with red beak for a nose
  and flashing eyes, the tengu was notorious for stirring up
  feuds and prolonging enmity between families. Indeed, the
  belligerent tengus were supposed to have been man's first
  instructors in the use of arms.
  [From: Mythical Beasts by Deirdre Headon
   (The Leprechuan Library).]
u A unicorn;
  Men have always sought the elusive unicorn, for the single
  twisted horn which projected from its forehead was thought
  to be a powerful talisman. It was said that the unicorn had
  simply to dip the tip of its horn in a muddy pool for the
  water to become pure. Men also believed that to drink from
  this horn was a protection against all sickness, and that if
  the horn was ground to a powder it would act as an antidote
  to all poisons. Less than 200 years ago in France, the horn
  of a unicorn was used in a ceremony to test the royal food
  for poison.
  Although only the size of a small horse, the unicorn is a
  very fierce beast, capable of killing an elephant with a
  single thrust from its horn. Its fleetness of foot also
  makes this solitary creature difficult to capture. However,
  it can be tamed and captured by a maiden. Made gentle by the
  sight of a virgin, the unicorn can be lured to lay its head
  in her lap, and in this docile mood, the maiden may secure
  it with a golden rope.
  [From: Mythical Beasts by Deirdre Headon
   (The Leprechaun Library).]
v A violet fungi
w A long worm;
  From its teeth the crysknife can be manufactured.
x A xan;
  The xan were animals sent to prick the legs of the Lords of Xibalba.
y A yellow light
z A zruty;
  The zruty are wild and gigantic beings, living in the wildernesses
  of the Tatra mountains.